README.md, before:

<img src="http://38.media.tumblr.com/db32471b7c8870cbb0b2cc173af283bb/tumblr_inline_nm9x9u6u261rw7ney_540.gif" height="170" width="100%" />


# Shards

ETS tables on steroids!

[Shards](https://github.com/cabol/shards) is an **Erlang/Elixir** library/tool compatible with the ETS API,
that implements [Sharding/Partitioning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_(database)) support on top of
ETS totally transparent and out-of-box. **Shards** might be probably the **simplest** option to scale-out ETS tables.

[Additional documentation on cabol.github.io](http://cabol.github.io/posts/2016/04/14/sharding-support-for-ets.html).


## Introduction

Why we might need **Sharding** on ETS tables? Well, the main reason is to scale-out ETS tables
(linear scalability), and support high levels of concurrency without write-locks issues, which
most of the cases might cause significant performance degradation. Therefore, one of the most
common and proven strategies to deal with these problems is [Sharding/Partitioning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_(database))
– the principle is pretty similar to [DHTs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_hash_table).

Here is where **Shards** comes in. **Shards** makes extremely easy achieve all this, with **zero** effort.
It provides an API compatible with [ETS](http://erlang.org/doc/man/ets.html) – with few exceptions.
You can find the list of compatible ETS functions that **Shards** provides [HERE](https://github.com/cabol/shards/issues/1).


## Build

    $ git clone https://github.com/cabol/shards.git
    $ cd shards
    $ make


## Getting Started!

Start an Erlang console with `shards` running:

    $ make shell

Once into the Erlang console:

```erlang
% let's create a table, such as you would create it with ETS, with 4 shards
> shards:new(mytab1, [{n_shards, 4}]).
{mytab1,{4,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}}
```

Exactly as ETS, `shards:new/2` function receives 2 arguments, the name of the table and
the options. With `shards` there are additional options:

 * `{n_shards, pos_integer()}`: allows to set the desired number of shards. By default,
   the number of shards is calculated from the total online schedulers.

 * `{scope, l | g}`: defines `shards` scope, in other words, if sharding will be applied
   locally (`l`) or global/distributed (`g`) – default is `l`.

 * `{restart_strategy, one_for_one | one_for_all}`: allows to configure the restart strategy for
   `shards_owner_sup`. Default is `one_for_one`.

 * `{pick_shard_fun, pick_shard_fun()}`: Function to pick the **shard** on which the `key`
   will be handled locally – used by `shards_local`. See the spec [HERE](https://github.com/cabol/shards/blob/master/src/shards_local.erl#L145).

 * `{pick_node_fun, pick_node_fun()}`: Function to pick the **node** on which the `key`
   will be handled globally/distributed – used by `shards_dist`. See the spec [HERE](https://github.com/cabol/shards/blob/master/src/shards_local.erl#L150).

> **NOTE:** By default `shards` uses a built-in functions to pick the **shard** (local scope)
  and the **node** (distributed scope) on which the key will be handled. BUT you can override
  them and set your own functions, they are totally configurable by table, so you can have
  different tables with different pick-functions each.

Besides, the `shards:new/2` function returns a tuple of two elements:

```erlang
{mytab1, {4, #Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>, set}}
 ^^^^^^  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  1st                     2nd
```

The first element is the name of the created table; `mytab1`. And the second one is the
[State](./src/shards_local.erl#L159): `{4, #Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>, set}`.
We'll talk about the **State** later, and see how it can be used.

> **NOTE:** For more information about `shards:new/2` go [HERE](./src/shards_local.erl#L796).

Let's continue:

```erlang
% create another one with default number of shards, which is the total of online
% schedulers; in my case is 8 (4 cores, 2 threads each).
% This value is calculated calling: erlang:system_info(schedulers_online)
> shards:new(mytab2, []).
{mytab2,{8,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}}

% now open the observer so you can see what happened
> observer:start().
ok
```

You will see something like this:

<p align="center"><a href="#">
<img src="./doc/assets/shards_process_tree_1.png" height="250" width="350">
</a></p>

This is the process tree of `shards` application. When you create a new "table", what happens behind
is: `shards` creates a supervision tree dedicated only to that group of shards that will represent
your logical table in multiple physical ETS tables, and everything is handled auto-magically by `shards`,
you only have to use the API like if you were working with a common ETS table.

Now let's execute some write/read operations against the created `shards`:

```erlang
% inserting some objects
> shards:insert(mytab1, [{k1, 1}, {k2, 2}, {k3, 3}]).
true

% let's check those objects
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k1).
[{k1,1}]
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k2).
[{k2,2}]
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k3).
[{k3,3}]
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k4).
[]

% delete an object and then check
> shards:delete(mytab1, k3).
true
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k3).
[]

% now let's find all stored objects using select
> MatchSpec = ets:fun2ms(fun({K, V}) -> {K, V} end).
[{{'$1','$2'},[],[{{'$1','$2'}}]}]
> shards:select(mytab1, MatchSpec).
[{k1,1},{k2,2}]
```

As you may have noticed, it's extremely easy, it's like use **ETS**, but instead to use
`ets` module replace it by `shards` module, remember, almost all ETS functions are
implemented by shards.

**Shards** behaves in elastic way, as you saw, more shards can be added dynamically
and also can be removed. E.g.:

```erlang
> shards:delete(mytab1).
true

> observer:start().
ok
```

See how `shards` gets shrinks:

<p align="center"><a href="#">
<img src="./doc/assets/shards_process_tree_2.png" height="200" width="300">
</a></p>

Extremely simple isn't?


## Using shards_local directly

The module `shards` is a wrapper on top of two main modules:

 * `shards_local`: Implements Sharding on top of ETS tables, but locally (on a single Erlang node).
 * `shards_dist`: Implements Sharding but across multiple distributed Erlang nodes, which must
   run `shards` locally, since `shards_dist` uses `shards_local` internally. We'll cover
   the distributed part later.

When you use `shards` on top of `shards_local`, a call to the control ETS table owned by `shards_owner_sup`
must be done, in order to recover the [State](./src/shards_local.erl#L159), mentioned previously.
Most of the `shards_local` functions receives the **State** as parameter, so it must be fetched before
to call it. You can check how `shards` module is implemented [HERE](./src/shards.erl).

If any microsecond matters to you, you can skip the call to the control ETS table by calling
`shards_local` directly. Now the question is: how to get the **State**? Well, it's extremely
easy, you can get the `state` when you call `shards:new/2` by first time, or you can call
`shards:state/1` at any time you want, and then it might be store it within the calling process,
or wherever you want. E.g.:

```erlang
% take a look at the 2nd element of the returned tuple, that is the state
> shards:new(mytab, [{n_shards, 4}]).
{mytab,{4,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}}
       ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

% State: {4, #Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>, set}
% 1st element is the number of shards
% 2nd element is the pick function to select the shard
% 3rd element is the type of ETS table

% you can also get the state at any time you want
> shards:state(mytab).
{4,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}
```

Most of the cases this is not necessary, `shards` wrapper is more than enough, it adds only a
few microseconds of latency. In conclusion, **Shards** gives you the flexibility to do it,
but it's your call!


## Distributed Shards

So far, we've seen how **Shards** works but locally, now let's see how **Shards** works but
distributed.

**1.** Let's start 3 Erlang consoles running shards:

Node `a`:

```
$ erl -sname a@localhost -pa _build/default/lib/*/ebin -s shards
```

Node `b`:

```
$ erl -sname b@localhost -pa _build/default/lib/*/ebin -s shards
```

Node `c`:

```
$ erl -sname c@localhost -pa _build/default/lib/*/ebin -s shards
```

**2.** Create a table with global scope (`{scope, g}`) on each node:

```erlang
% when a tables is created with {scope, g}, the module shards_dist is used
% internally by shards
> shards:new(mytab, [{n_shards, 4}, {scope, g}]).
{mytab,{4,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}}
```

**3.** Setup the `shards` cluster.

From node `a`, join `b` and `c` nodes:

```erlang
> shards:join(mytab, ['b@localhost', 'c@localhost']).
[a@localhost,b@localhost,c@localhost]
```

Let's check that all nodes have the same nodes running next function on each node:

```erlang
> shards:get_nodes(mytab).
[a@localhost,b@localhost,c@localhost]
```

**4.** Now **Shards** cluster is ready, let's do some basic operations:

From node `a`:

```erlang
> shards:insert(mytab, [{k1, 1}, {k2, 2}]).
true
```

From node `b`:

```erlang
> shards:insert(mytab, [{k3, 3}, {k4, 4}]).
true
```

From node `c`:

```erlang
> shards:insert(mytab, [{k5, 5}, {k6, 6}]).
true
```

Now, from any of previous nodes:

```erlang
> [shards:lookup_element(mytab, Key, 2) || Key <- [k1, k2, k3, k4, k5, k6]].
[1,2,3,4,5,6]
```

All nodes should return the same result.

Let's do some deletions, from any node:

```erlang
> shards:delete(mytab, k6).
true
```

And again, let's check it out from any node:

```erlang
% as you can see 'k6' was deleted
> shards:lookup(mytab, k6).
[]

% check remaining values
> [shards:lookup_element(mytab, Key, 2) || Key <- [k1, k2, k3, k4, k5]].    
[1,2,3,4,5]
```

> **NOTE**: This module is still under continuous development. So far, only few
  basic functions have been implemented.


## Examples and/or Projects using Shards

* [ExShards](https://github.com/cabol/exshards) is an **Elixir** wrapper for `shards`.

* [ErlBus](https://github.com/cabol/erlbus) uses `shards` to scale-out **Topics/Pids** table(s),
  which can be too large and with high concurrency level.

* [Cacherl](https://github.com/ferigis/cacherl) uses `shards` to implement a Distributed Cache.


## Running Tests

    $ make tests


## Building Edoc

    $ make edoc

> **Note:** Once you run previous command, a new folder `edoc` is created, and you'll have a pretty nice HTML documentation.


## Copyright and License

Copyright (c) 2016 Carlos Andres Bolaños R.A.

**Shards** source code is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE.md).

Commit message:

Preparing v0.2.0. Fix `shards_dist` to handle `auto_eject_nodes` flag and/or unexpected errors. General fixes on specs, docs and type definitions.

README.md, after:

<img src="http://38.media.tumblr.com/db32471b7c8870cbb0b2cc173af283bb/tumblr_inline_nm9x9u6u261rw7ney_540.gif" height="170" width="100%" />


# Shards

ETS tables on steroids!

[Shards](https://github.com/cabol/shards) is an **Erlang/Elixir** library/tool compatible with the ETS API,
that implements [Sharding/Partitioning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_(database)) support on top of
ETS totally transparent and out-of-box. **Shards** might be probably the **simplest** option to scale-out ETS tables.

[Additional documentation on cabol.github.io](http://cabol.github.io/posts/2016/04/14/sharding-support-for-ets.html).


## Introduction

Why we might need **Sharding** on ETS tables? Well, the main reason is to scale-out ETS tables
(linear scalability), and support high levels of concurrency without write-locks issues, which
most of the cases might cause significant performance degradation. Therefore, one of the most
common and proven strategies to deal with these problems is [Sharding/Partitioning](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Partition_(database))
– the principle is pretty similar to [DHTs](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Distributed_hash_table).

Here is where **Shards** comes in. **Shards** makes extremely easy achieve all this, with **zero** effort.
It provides an API compatible with [ETS](http://erlang.org/doc/man/ets.html) – with few exceptions.
You can find the list of compatible ETS functions that **Shards** provides [HERE](https://github.com/cabol/shards/issues/1).


## Build

    $ git clone https://github.com/cabol/shards.git
    $ cd shards
    $ make


## Getting Started!

Start an Erlang console with `shards` running:

    $ make shell

Once into the Erlang console:

```erlang
% let's create a table, such as you would create it with ETS, with 4 shards
> shards:new(mytab1, [{n_shards, 4}]).
{mytab1,{4,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}}
```

Exactly as ETS, `shards:new/2` function receives 2 arguments, the name of the table and
the options. With `shards` there are additional options:

 * `{n_shards, pos_integer()}`: allows to set the desired number of shards. By default,
   the number of shards is calculated from the total online schedulers.

 * `{scope, l | g}`: defines `shards` scope, in other words, if sharding will be applied
   locally (`l`) or global/distributed (`g`) – default is `l`.

 * `{restart_strategy, one_for_one | one_for_all}`: allows to configure the restart strategy for
   `shards_owner_sup`. Default is `one_for_one`.

 * `{auto_eject_nodes, boolean()}`: A boolean value that controls if node should be ejected
   when it fails. – Default is `true`.

 * `{pick_shard_fun, pick_shard_fun()}`: Function to pick the **shard** on which the `key`
   will be handled locally – used by `shards_local`. See the spec [HERE](https://github.com/cabol/shards/blob/master/src/shards_local.erl#L145).

 * `{pick_node_fun, pick_node_fun()}`: Function to pick the **node** on which the `key`
   will be handled globally/distributed – used by `shards_dist`. See the spec [HERE](https://github.com/cabol/shards/blob/master/src/shards_local.erl#L150).

> **NOTE:** By default `shards` uses a built-in functions to pick the **shard** (local scope)
  and the **node** (distributed scope) on which the key will be handled. BUT you can override
  them and set your own functions, they are totally configurable by table, so you can have
  different tables with different pick-functions each.

Besides, the `shards:new/2` function returns a tuple of two elements:

```erlang
{mytab1, {4, #Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>, set}}
 ^^^^^^  ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^
  1st                     2nd
```

The first element is the name of the created table; `mytab1`. And the second one is the
[State](./src/shards_local.erl#L189-L205): `{4, #Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>, set}`.
We'll talk about the **State** later, and see how it can be used.

> **NOTE:** For more information about `shards:new/2` see [shards](./src/shards.erl).

Let's continue:

```erlang
% create another one with default number of shards, which is the total of online
% schedulers; in my case is 8 (4 cores, 2 threads each).
% This value is calculated calling: erlang:system_info(schedulers_online)
> shards:new(mytab2, []).
{mytab2,{8,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}}

% now open the observer so you can see what happened
> observer:start().
ok
```

You will see something like this:

<p align="center"><a href="#">
<img src="./doc/assets/shards_process_tree_1.png" height="250" width="350">
</a></p>

This is the process tree of `shards` application. When you create a new "table", what happens behind
is: `shards` creates a supervision tree dedicated only to that group of shards that will represent
your logical table in multiple physical ETS tables, and everything is handled auto-magically by `shards`,
you only have to use the API like if you were working with a common ETS table.

Now let's execute some write/read operations against the created `shards`:

```erlang
% inserting some objects
> shards:insert(mytab1, [{k1, 1}, {k2, 2}, {k3, 3}]).
true

% let's check those objects
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k1).
[{k1,1}]
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k2).
[{k2,2}]
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k3).
[{k3,3}]
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k4).
[]

% delete an object and then check
> shards:delete(mytab1, k3).
true
> shards:lookup(mytab1, k3).
[]

% now let's find all stored objects using select
> MatchSpec = ets:fun2ms(fun({K, V}) -> {K, V} end).
[{{'$1','$2'},[],[{{'$1','$2'}}]}]
> shards:select(mytab1, MatchSpec).
[{k1,1},{k2,2}]
```

As you may have noticed, it's extremely easy, it's like use **ETS**, but instead to use
`ets` module replace it by `shards` module, remember, almost all ETS functions are
implemented by shards.

**Shards** behaves in elastic way, as you saw, more shards can be added dynamically
and also can be removed. E.g.:

```erlang
> shards:delete(mytab1).
true

> observer:start().
ok
```

See how `shards` gets shrinks:

<p align="center"><a href="#">
<img src="./doc/assets/shards_process_tree_2.png" height="200" width="300">
</a></p>

Extremely simple isn't?


## Using shards_local directly

The module `shards` is a wrapper on top of two main modules:

 * [shards_local](./src/shards_local.erl): Implements Sharding on top of ETS tables, but locally (on a single Erlang node).
 * [shards_dist](./src/shards_dist.erl): Implements Sharding but across multiple distributed Erlang nodes, which must
   run `shards` locally, since `shards_dist` uses `shards_local` internally. We'll cover
   the distributed part later.

When you use `shards` on top of `shards_local`, a call to the control ETS table owned by `shards_owner_sup`
must be done, in order to recover the [State](./src/shards_local.erl#L189-L205), mentioned previously.
Most of the `shards_local` functions receives the **State** as parameter, so it must be fetched before
to call it. You can check how `shards` module is implemented [HERE](./src/shards.erl).

If any microsecond matters to you, you can skip the call to the control ETS table by calling
`shards_local` directly. Now the question is: how to get the **State**? Well, it's extremely
easy, you can get the `state` when you call `shards:new/2` by first time, or you can call
`shards:state/1` at any time you want, and then it might be store it within the calling process,
or wherever you want. E.g.:

```erlang
% take a look at the 2nd element of the returned tuple, that is the state
> shards:new(mytab, [{n_shards, 4}]).
{mytab,{4,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}}
       ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

% State: {4, #Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>, set}
% 1st element is the number of shards
% 2nd element is the pick function to select the shard
% 3rd element is the type of ETS table

% you can also get the state at any time you want
> shards:state(mytab).
{4,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set}
```

Most of the cases this is not necessary, `shards` wrapper is more than enough, it adds only a
few microseconds of latency. In conclusion, **Shards** gives you the flexibility to do it,
but it's your call!


## Distributed Shards

So far, we've seen how **Shards** works but locally, now let's see how **Shards** works but
distributed.

**1.** Let's start 3 Erlang consoles running shards:

Node `a`:

```
$ erl -sname a@localhost -pa _build/default/lib/*/ebin -s shards
```

Node `b`:

```
$ erl -sname b@localhost -pa _build/default/lib/*/ebin -s shards
```

Node `c`:

```
$ erl -sname c@localhost -pa _build/default/lib/*/ebin -s shards
```

**2.** Create a table with global scope (`{scope, g}`) on each node:

```erlang
% when a tables is created with {scope, g}, the module shards_dist is used
% internally by shards
> shards:new(mytab, [{n_shards, 4}, {scope, g}]).
{mytab,{{4,#Fun<shards_local.pick_shard.3>,set},
        {#Fun<shards_dist.pick_node.3>,true}}}
```

**3.** Setup the `shards` cluster.

From node `a`, join `b` and `c` nodes:

```erlang
> shards:join(mytab, ['b@localhost', 'c@localhost']).
[a@localhost,b@localhost,c@localhost]
```

Let's check that all nodes have the same nodes running next function on each node:

```erlang
> shards:get_nodes(mytab).
[a@localhost,b@localhost,c@localhost]
```

**4.** Now **Shards** cluster is ready, let's do some basic operations:

From node `a`:

```erlang
> shards:insert(mytab, [{k1, 1}, {k2, 2}]).
true
```

From node `b`:

```erlang
> shards:insert(mytab, [{k3, 3}, {k4, 4}]).
true
```

From node `c`:

```erlang
> shards:insert(mytab, [{k5, 5}, {k6, 6}]).
true
```

Now, from any of previous nodes:

```erlang
> [shards:lookup_element(mytab, Key, 2) || Key <- [k1, k2, k3, k4, k5, k6]].
[1,2,3,4,5,6]
```

All nodes should return the same result.

Let's do some deletions, from any node:

```erlang
> shards:delete(mytab, k6).
true
```

And again, let's check it out from any node:

```erlang
% as you can see 'k6' was deleted
> shards:lookup(mytab, k6).
[]

% check remaining values
> [shards:lookup_element(mytab, Key, 2) || Key <- [k1, k2, k3, k4, k5]].    
[1,2,3,4,5]
```

> **NOTE**: This module is still under continuous development. So far, only few
  basic functions have been implemented.


## Examples and/or Projects using Shards

* [ExShards](https://github.com/cabol/exshards) is an **Elixir** wrapper for `shards`.

* [ErlBus](https://github.com/cabol/erlbus) uses `shards` to scale-out **Topics/Pids** table(s),
  which can be too large and with high concurrency level.

* [Cacherl](https://github.com/ferigis/cacherl) uses `shards` to implement a Distributed Cache.


## Running Tests

    $ make tests


## Building Edoc

    $ make edoc

> **Note:** Once you run previous command, a new folder `edoc` is created, and you'll have a pretty nice HTML documentation.


## Copyright and License

Copyright (c) 2016 Carlos Andres Bolaños R.A.

**Shards** source code is licensed under the [MIT License](LICENSE.md).
